[WIP] Document ConfigureDbContext (#5118)
dotnet/EntityFramework.Docs: entity-framework/core/dbcontext-configuration/index.md

Read further in this article to learn more about configuration options. See [Dependency injection in ASP.NET Core](/aspnet/core/fundamentals/dependency-injection) for more information.

<a name="configuredbcontext"></a>

> ## ConfigureDbContext for configuration composition

Reviewer: @copilot Move this new section to the end and qualify this as intermediate-level usage

    options.UseSqlite(customConnectionString)
           .EnableSensitiveDataLogging());
```

### Alternative approaches for conditional configuration

If you need conditional configuration based on runtime conditions, consider using a factory pattern or options configuration:

<!--
        var services = new ServiceCollection();
        
        // Mock environment and configuration services
        var isDevelopment = Environment.GetEnvironmentVariable("ASPNETCORE_ENVIRONMENT") == "Development";
        
        services.AddDbContext<BlogContext>((serviceProvider, options) =>
        {
            if (isDevelopment)
            {
                options.UseInMemoryDatabase("DevelopmentDatabase")
                       .EnableSensitiveDataLogging()
                       .EnableDetailedErrors();
            }
            else
            {
                options.UseInMemoryDatabase("ProductionDatabase");
            }
        });

        var serviceProvider = services.BuildServiceProvider();
-->
[!code-csharp[ConditionalConfiguration](../../../samples/core/Miscellaneous/ConfiguringDbContext/ConfigureDbContextSample/Program.cs?name=ConditionalConfiguration)]

> 

Reviewer: @copilot Replace this and the associated sample project with a description of how `ConfigureDbContext` can be used to add configuration for a context either before or after the `Add*` call for non-conflicting non-provider-specific configuration composition that could be used in reusable components or tests. Also mention how provider-specific configuration can be applied by avoiding the connection string or using `ConfigureSqlEngine`

Read further in this article to learn more about configuration options. See [Dependency injection in ASP.NET Core](/aspnet/core/fundamentals/dependency-injection) for more information.

<a name="configuredbcontext"></a>

## ConfigureDbContext for configuration composition

Starting with EF Core 9.0, you can use `ConfigureDbContext` to apply additional configuration to a `DbContext` either before or after the `AddDbContext` call. This is particularly useful for composing non-conflicting, non-provider-specific configuration in reusable components or tests.

### Basic ConfigureDbContext usage

`ConfigureDbContext` allows you to add configuration without replacing the entire provider configuration:

```csharp
// In a reusable library or component
services.ConfigureDbContext<ApplicationDbContext>(options =>
    options.EnableSensitiveDataLogging()
           .EnableDetailedErrors());

// Later, in the application
services.AddDbContext<ApplicationDbContext>(options =>
    options.UseSqlServer(connectionString));

> ```

Reviewer: @copilot  Update `ConfigureDbContextSample/Program.cs` to include the added snippets and reference them from docs. Remove code from Program.cs that's not referenced and not necessary for it to compile and run

    options.UseSqlServer(sqlOptions => 
        sqlOptions.EnableRetryOnFailure()
                  .CommandTimeout(30)));

// Later, add the context with the connection string
services.AddDbContext<ApplicationDbContext>(options =>
    options.UseSqlServer(connectionString));
```

### ConfigureDbContext and AddDbContext precedence

When both `ConfigureDbContext` and `AddDbContext` are used, or when multiple calls to these methods are made, the configuration is applied in the order the methods are called, with later calls taking precedence for conflicting options.

For non-conflicting options (like adding logging, interceptors, or other settings), all configurations are composed together:

```csharp
// First: add logging
services.ConfigureDbContext<ApplicationDbContext>(options =>
    options.LogTo(Console.WriteLine));

// Second: add the provider
services.AddDbContext<ApplicationDbContext>(options =>
    options.UseSqlServer(connectionString));

// Third: add sensitive data logging
services.ConfigureDbContext<ApplicationDbContext>(options =>
    options.EnableSensitiveDataLogging());

// Result: All three configurations are applied
```

> For conflicting options (like specifying different database providers), the last configuration wins. See [breaking changes in EF Core 8.0](xref:core/what-is-new/ef-core-8.0/breaking-changes#AddDbContext) for more information about this behavior change.

Reviewer: @copilot 
```suggestion
For conflicting options, the last configuration wins. See [breaking changes in EF Core 8.0](xref:core/what-is-new/ef-core-8.0/breaking-changes#AddDbContext) for more information about this behavior change.
```

Mention that configuring a different provider will not remove the previous provider configuration and show a workaround for how this can be done by removing the configuration service descriptor

Using dependency injection, this can be achieved by either registering the context as scoped, and creating scopes (using `IServiceScopeFactory`) for each thread, or by registering the `DbContext` as transient (using the overload of `AddDbContext` which takes a `ServiceLifetime` parameter).

<a name="configuredbcontext"></a>

## ConfigureDbContext for configuration composition (intermediate)

> [!NOTE]

> > This section covers intermediate-level usage of EF Core primarily intended for reusable libraries and components (such as Aspire). Most applications should use the `AddDbContext` pattern described earlier in this article.

Reviewer: @copilot 
```suggestion
> This section covers intermediate-level usage of EF Core primarily intended for reusable libraries and components. Most applications should use the `AddDbContextFactory` pattern described earlier in this article.
```
